---
layout: default
title: Mock test 3 Solutions
nav_exclude: true
parent: Mock tests
permalink: docs/math-exams/cmi/mocktests/2022/mt-3-sol
---


#  Mock test #3 Solutions
{: .no_toc }

---



## Part A: Short-answer type questions


**For this part, answers must be written without any explanation.**



<ol>


<li>
<p>
How many factors of \(2^{5} 3^{6} 5^{2}\) are perfect squares?<br>
A) 24<br>
B) 20<br>
C) 30<br>
D) 36<br>
</p>
</li>


<details open> <summary>Sol.</summary>
Ans: 24.<br>
The factors are of the form \(2^x3^y5^z\) where \(x\leq 5,y \leq 6 ,z \leq 2 \) must be even.
</details>


<!--
Madhava 2018.
-->

<li>
<p>
Find the value of expression:<br>
\[ \sum_{n=1}^{\infty} \frac{\sin n}{n} \]
</p>
</li>

<details open> <summary>Sol.</summary>
Ans: \( (\pi-1)/2 \)<br>
Power series of \( - \log (1-z) = \sum_{n=1}^{\infty} \frac{z^n}{n}\) and we can write \(\sin x\) as \(\dfrac{1}{2i}(e^{ix}-e^{-ix})\).
The infinite sum is \(\dfrac{1}{2i}(-\ln(1-e^{i})+\ln(1-e^{-i})=\dfrac{1}{2i}(-\ln(-e^{-i})=\dfrac{\pi - 1}{2}\).
</details>


<li>
<p>

 Let \(\omega \neq 1\) be a complex cube root of unity. If
\[\left(3-3 \omega+2 \omega^{2}\right)^{4 n+3}+\left(2+3 \omega-3 \omega^{2}\right)^{4 n+3}+\left(-3+2 \omega+3 \omega^{2}\right)^{4 n+3}=0\]
then the possible value(s) of \(n\) is (are)<br>
A) 1 <br>
B) 2 <br>
C) 4 <br>
D) 5 <br>

</p>
</li>

<details open> <summary>Sol.</summary>
Ans: A, B, C and D.<br>
</details>

<li>
<p>
Let \(a, b \in R\) and \(f: R \rightarrow R\) be defined by \(f(x)=a \cos \left(\left|x^{3}-x\right|\right)+b|x| \sin \left(\left|x^{3}+x\right|\right)\). Then \(f\) is<br>
A) differentiable at \(x=0\) if \(a=0\) and \(b=1\)<br>
B) differentiable at \(x=1\) if \(a=1\) and \(b=0\)<br>
C) NOT differentiable at \(x=0\) if \(a=1\) and \(b=0\)<br>
D) NOT differentiable at \(x=1\) if \(a=1\) and \(b=1\)

</p>
</li>


<!--
<i>Prob. 2 and 3 from JEE '14 and '16.</i>
-->

<details open> <summary>Sol.</summary>
Ans: A and B.<br>
</details>


<li>
<p>
What is value of the series given below:
\[(20)^2+ \dfrac{(21)^2}{1!} + \dfrac{(22)^2}{2!} + \dfrac{(23)^2}{3!} + \cdots \]
</p>
</li>

<details open> <summary>Sol.</summary>
Ans: \(442e\).<br>
We know that 
\[e^x = \sum_{n=0}^{\infty}\dfrac{x^n}{n!}.\]
Then we can do a pattern of differentiating and multiplying by $x$.
\[x^{20}e^x=\sum_{n=0}^{\infty}\dfrac{x^{n+20}}{n!}\]
\[(20x^{19} + x^{20})e^x = \sum_{n=0}^{\infty}\dfrac{(n+20)x^{n+19}}{n!}\]
\[(20x^{20} + x^{2021})e^x = \sum_{n=0}^{\infty}\dfrac{(n+20)x^{n+20}}{n!}\]
\[(20^2x^{19} + 41x^{20} + x^{21})e^x =\sum_{n=0}^{\infty}\dfrac{(n+20)^2x^{n+19}}{n!}\]
So, our desired sum occurs when \(x = 1\), and we obtain \(442e\).
</details>


<!--
Raghav
Next four from Madhava 2018.
-->

<li>
<p> Let \(g\) be a continuous function which is not differentiable at 0 and let \(g(0)=8\). If \(f(x)=x g(x)\), then \(f^{\prime}(0)=\)<br>
A) 0<br>
B) 4<br>
C) 2<br>
D) 8<br>
</p>
</li>

<details open> <summary>Sol.</summary>
Ans: D.
</details>

<li>
<p>If the circles \(x^{2}+y^{2}=1\) and \((x-a)^{2}+(y-b)^{2}=1\) have exactly one point in common, then the point \((a, b)\) lies on<br>
A) \(x^{2}+y^{2}=1\)<br>
B) \((x-a)^{2}+(y-b)^{2}=1\)<br>
C) \(x^{2}+y^{2}=2\)<br>
D) \(x^{2}+y^{2}=4\).<br>
</p>
</li>

<details open> <summary>Sol.</summary>
Ans: D.<br>
</details>

<li>
<p> If \(x\) and \(y\) are non-zero real numbers, then \(x^{2}+x y+y^{2}\)<br>
A) is always negative<br>
B) takes the value zero for some \(x, y\)<br>
C) is always positive<br>
D) takes both positive and negative values.<br>
</p>
</li>

<details open> <summary>Sol.</summary>
Ans: C. \(x^2+y^2 \geq |2xy| > |xy|\). So \(x^2+y^2\) is always greater than \(xy\).<br>
</details>


<li>
<p> The set of all real numbers \(x\) such that || \(3-x|-| x+2||=5\) is<br>
A) \([3, \infty)\)<br>
В) \((-\infty,-2] \cup[3, \infty)\)<br>
C) \((-\infty,-2]\)<br>
D) \((-\infty,-3] \cup[2, \infty)\).<br>
</p>
</li>

<details open> <summary>Sol.</summary>
Ans: B <br>
</details>


<li>
<p>
If \(f(x)=nx , g(x) = e^{2x},\) and \(h(x)=g(f(x))\). If  \(h'(0)=100\), find \(n\).
</p>
</li>

<details open> <summary>Sol.</summary>
Ans: 50. <br>
If \(f(x)=n x, g(x)=e^{2 x}\) and \(h(x)=g(f(x))\), then \(h(x)=e^{2(n x)}\). The derivative of \(h(x)\) is \(2 n \cdot e^{2 n x}\), by the chain rule. Then, plugging in 0 for \(x\) gets us \(2 n=100\), so \(n=50\).
</details>




</ol>

## Part B: Subjective questions

**Submission files:** Each question in this part must be answered on a page of its own. Name the files as B1.jpg, B2.jpg, etc. In case you have multiple files
for the same question, say B4, name the corresponding files as B4-1.jpg, B4-2.jpg, etc.
{: .fs-3 }


**Clearly explain your entire reasoning.** No credit will be given without reasoning. Partial solutions may get partial credit.


---

<p><b>B1.</b> 
Five people each choose an integer between \(1\) and \(3\), inclusive. What is the probability that all three numbers get chosen?
</p>

---

<details open> <summary>Sol.</summary>
Answer: \(50/81\).<br>
Use complementary counting and principle of inclusion and exclusion. Call \(E_n\) the event where \(n\) is not chosen. Then, using the PIE, \((E_1 \cup E_2 \cup E_3)=(E_1) \cup (E_2) \cup (E_3)-((E_1 \cap E_2) + (E_2 \cap E_3) + (E_1 \cap E_3)) + (E_1 \cap E_2 \cap E_3)\). \((E_1) = 2^5\), since there are two numbers are left over for 5 people to choose and similarly, \((E_1 \cup E_2) = 1^5\), and \((E_1 \cup E_2 \cup E_3) = 0\). Thus there are \( 3 * 2^5 - 3 = 93\) ways that one of the 3 numbers is not selected. Our final answer is then \(P = 1 - \dfrac{93}{3^5} = \dfrac{50}{81}\).
</details>



<p><b>B2.</b> 
In a convex quadrilateral \(ABCD\) ,\(\angle ABC\) and \(\angle BCD\) are \(\geq 120^\circ\). Prove that \(|AC|\) + \(|BD| \geq |AB|+|BC|+|CD|\). <i>Notation. </i> \(|XY|\) denotes the length of the segment \(XY\).
</p>

<details open> <summary>Sol.</summary>
By the cosine theorem:
\[
AC^2=AB^2+BC^2-2AB.BC cos(\angle ABC) \geq AB^2+BC^2-2AB.BC (-\frac{1}{2}) = AB^2+BC^2+AB.BC
\]
It's obvious \( cos(\angle ABC) \leq -\frac{1}{2}\) because \( \angle ABC \geq 120^{o} \).
On the other hand:
\[
AB^2+BC^2+AB.BC > AB^2 + \frac{1}{4}BC^2 + AB.BC = (AB + \frac{1}{2}BC)^2
\]
So \( AC > AB + \dfrac{1}{2}BC \). In the same way we show that : \( BD > CD + \frac{1}{2}BC \)
Adding these inequalities we obtain: \( AC + BD \geq AB+BC+CD\). 
</details>


---

<p><b>B3.</b> Consider a \(3 \times 3\) grid with the first \(9\) positive integers placed in the grid. Take the greatest integer in each row and let \(r\) be the smallest of those numbers. Take the smallest integer in each
column and let \(c\) be the greatest of those numbers.<br>
(a) True or false: Regardless of the arrangement of the numbers, \(r \leq c\) always. Give explanation if true or a counterexample, if false.<br>
(b) How many arrangements are there such that \(r \leq c \leq 4\)?
</p>


<details open> <summary>Sol.</summary>

(a) False. The matrix below is a counterexample.

\[ \begin{bmatrix} 8 & 1 & 4 \\ 2 & 5 & 9 \\ 3 & 7 & 6 \end{bmatrix} \]


(b) Answer is \(38880\).<br>
We first note that \(r\) and \(c\) are have minimum value \(3\). We proceed using casework.
If \(r = c = 3\), then we need to split \(1,2,3\) into different columns for \(c = 3\). Then they necessarily need to be in the same row for \(r = 3\). There are \(9\) places to choose where the \(3\) is, \(2\) more ways to arrange \(1,2\) in the row and \(6!\) ways to arrange the other numbers. Thus, there are \(9 \cdot 2 \cdot 6! = 720 \cdot 18 = 12960\) arrangements. If \(r = 3, c = 4\). Then again \(1,2,3\) need to be in the same row, forcing them to be in different columns. But we need 4 to be the smallest integer in some column, hence causing a problem. So, there are \(0\) arrangements. Finally if \(r = 4, c = 4\), we can choose \(9\) places for the \(4\) to be. Then we are forced to place two of the numbers \(1,2,3\) in the row, giving us \(6\) ordered ways. Then the final number can not be placed in the same column as the \(4\), hence there are \(4\) places to put it. Finally there are \(5!\) ways to place the final numbers. So there are \(9 \cdot 6 \cdot 4 \cdot 5! = 25920\). Thus there are \(12960 + 25920 = 38880\) arrangements.
</details>

---

<p><b>B4.</b>
Three squares have average area \(\bar{A}=100 \mathrm{~m}^{2}\). The average of the lengths of their sides is \(\bar{l}=10 \mathrm{~m}\). Find all possible values of
the size of the largest of the three squares. The answer must be given along with reasoning.
</p>



<details open> <summary>Sol.</summary>


<i>Solution 1.</i><br>
Using Cauchy-Schwarz inequality: See <a href="https://cmientranceexam.in/assets/images/mock_test_15/Colin_Maclaurin/B4.jpg">Colin Maclaurin's solution</a>.



<br>

<i>Solution 2.</i><br>
Let \(x\) be the length of the side of a square, and let the probability of \(x\) be \(1 / 3,1 / 3,1 / 3\) over the three lengths \(l_{1}, l_{2}, l_{3}\).
Let \(\mathcal{E}[x]\) denote the expected length. Then the information that we have is that \(\mathcal{E}[x]=10\) and \(\mathcal{E}[f(x)]=100\), where \(f(x)=x^{2}\) is the function mapping lengths to areas. 
This is a strictly convex function. We notice that the equality \(\mathcal{E}[f(x)]=f(\mathcal{E}[x])\) holds,
therefore \(x\) is a constant, and the three lengths must all be equal. The area of the largest square is \(100 \mathrm{m}^{2}\).
</details>



---

<p><b>B5.</b> Let \(t\) be a randomly chosen positive divisor of 20!. What is the probability that \(t\) can be written as \(a^{2}+b^{2}\) for some integers \(a\) and \(b\)?
</p>

<details open> <summary>Sol.</summary>
Ans. \(\frac{5}{54}\)<br>
The choice \(k\) can be written as the sum of two squares if and only if every prime \(p \equiv 3(\bmod 4)\) appears to an even power in the prime factorization of \(k\).
The primes \(p \leq 20\) with \(p \equiv 3(\bmod 4)\) are \(3,7,11\), and 19. Also, \(20 !=3^{8} \cdot 7^{2} \cdot 11^{1} \cdot 19^{1} \cdot k\) where \(k\) is not divisible by any of these primes. Therefore, a randomly positive divisor of 20 ! has prime factorization \(3^{a} \cdot 7^{b} \cdot 11^{c} \cdot 19^{d} \cdot l\) where \(l\) is not divisible by any of these primes, \(a \in[0,8], a \in[0,2], a \in[0,1]\), \(a \in[0,1]\). Furthermore \(a, b, c\), and \(d\) take on the possible values with equally likelihood and independently of each other. It suffices to compute the probability that \(a, b, c\), and \(d\) are all even which is \(\left(\frac{5}{9}\right)\left(\frac{2}{3}\right)\left(\frac{1}{2}\right)\left(\frac{1}{2}\right)=\frac{5}{54}\).
</details>


---


<p><b>B6.</b> Compute \[ \int_{\frac{1}{2}}^{2} \frac{\tan ^{-1} x}{x^{2}-x+1} dx \]
</p>

<details open> <summary>Sol.</summary>
Take \(y=1 / x\), then \(\frac{d x}{x^{2}-x+1}=-\frac{d y}{y^{2}-y+1}\). Note furthermore by the tangent addition formula that \(\tan ^{-1}(x)+\tan ^{-1}(y)=\pi / 2\). The original integral is equal to the average of these two integrals:
\[ \frac{1}{2}\left(\int_{\frac{1}{2}}^{2} \frac{\tan ^{-1} x}{x^{2}-x+1} d x+\int_{\frac{1}{2}}^{2} \frac{\frac{\pi}{2}-\tan ^{-1} y}{y^{2}-y+1} d y\right)=\frac{\pi}{4} \int_{1 / 2}^{2} \frac{d x}{x^{2}-x+1} \]
Substitute \(x=\frac{\sqrt{3}}{2} \theta+1 / 2\), then
\[ \frac{\pi}{4} \int_{1 / 2}^{2} \frac{d x}{x^{2}-x+1}=\frac{\pi}{4} \frac{4}{3} \frac{\sqrt{3}}{2} \int_{0}^{\sqrt{3}} \frac{1}{\theta^{2}+1} d \theta=\frac{\pi^{2} \sqrt{3}}{18} \]
</details>